# Results from analyzing airplane dataset

## Analyzing recent data before COVID
  When analyzing data from July 2019, the results we obtained matched our expectations quite well. Important passenger hubs like ORD (O'Hare), ATL (Atlanta), and DFW (Dallas) were ranked highly on the list, and small regional airports made up the bottom third of the ranking. However, we were surprised to learn that some of the smallest airports could require three flights to get to from some large hubs. Initially, we expected only a single connected component within the graph, with most airports being within only one or two flights from a large hub. We also noticed a lack of self-edges (edge from A to A) and flights between various hub airports within the same city, such as ORD and MDW. While we expected an absence of self-edges for commercial flights, we were unsure if sightseeing flights would be counted in the database. By checking the shortest path and looking though the CSV file, we were able to determine with a high level of certainty that these sightseeing flights were not counted. However, the lack of any flights between airports in the same city was somewhat suprising. We expected that connecting traffic would find it more convenient to take another flight (rather than leave the secure area, use public transit, check in again, and go through security again), but it seems that either the demand for such flights is too small for any airline, or not many passengers connect between airports in the same city (or both). 
  
## Analyzing data from the lockdown period
  The results from ranking various airports were the same as expected for both 1990 and 2019, with airports like O'Hare and Atlanta dominating the list. When we ran the program over April 2020, we noticed a significantly smaller volume of flights, with about the same number of unique flights. This was likely due to airlines flying with smaller planes and fewer passengers, combined with FAA regulations that required airlines to maintain a certain level of service. Moreover, when ranking airports, several important airports such as Atlanta had fallen several spots in the ranking, with Dallas now on top. Interestingly, Anchorage (which was the busiest airport in the world at the time) is not ranked highly on the list. This is probably an artifact of how our data has been taken. Since we used a database for reporting flight delays, it is likely that the database only contains passenger flights. Since most of the traffic in Anchorage is from cargo flights, this would not show up in the data, explaining the absence of large cargo hubs from the list's top 10 spots. Another thing that we noticed was that the furthest airports from big hubs (ORD, DFW, etc.) still required 3 flights to get to. However, the number of airports that required 3 flights nearly doubled when looking at DFW and comparing to the july 2019 data. Again, this is probably an effect of reduced air travel due to COVID. 
  
## Analyzing historical data

When analyzing some of the earliest data we had access to (from the late 1980s and early 1990s), we noticed that demand for air travel had risen by a third between November 1988 and July 2019 despite the September 11 attacks and the advent of the Internet. While we expected to see an increase in flights, we did not expect it to be so dramatic. This increase may be partly caused by comparing different months, since air traffic decreases significantly in the winter months (despite Thanksgiving being the busiest time of the year). Despite the change in traffic volume, airlines have maintained a similar network over the past thirty years, since almost all airports maintained similar rankings. On the other hand, medium and small airports have seen a large increase in traffic overall. This is probably due to the emerging popularity of the point-to-point model (instead of the hub-and-spoke model). While many cities required stopovers to get to in the 1980s (except hub airports), there are many direct flights available in 2019. Moreover, the number of airports that require 3 flights to get to from a major hub has dropped significantly, with less than half of the airports requiring 3 flights remaining on the list after thirty years. Overall, most of the growth in the industry for the past thirty years seems to have come from demand for direct flights between medium and small airports rather than an increase in traffic through the major hubs.
